Anatomy of the Virtue Signal
=====

Over the past several years, there seems to have been a gradually increasing awareness and concern among people of all political persuasions of what I will refer to in this essay as *pathologic tribalism*. There seems to be a vague unease that something is wrong with The System. But what is it, exactly? What is the problem? Or more importantly -- *who* is the problem?!? There seems to be no consensus on an answer to this question. Even those who would proffer a definitive answer are, sometimes inwardly, increasingly unsure of the narrative they seem to hold with such convistion. In this essay I will tender my own meta-analysis of this trend that we see, in the hopes that I may offer some actinonable insights. Maybe prevent society from running off the proverbial cliff.

I will begin with a definition of some basic ideas: tribe, tribalism, narrative, narrative fiction, and virtue signaling. Some of these terms and ideas are in common usage. Some, I am borrowing from postmodernists. But to a large extent, the terms and ideas are my own, based on observations and interactions with family, friends, and -- perhaps it should go without saying -- strangers on the internet. I will pay particular focus on a high level, abstract description of the phonomenon of virtue signaling, a phenomenon that (perhaps surprisingly to some) is not limited to any one particular political persuasion, segment of society, or tribe. It is my hope that by the end of this essay, the reader will be able to identify pathologic elements of the tribal narrative and of virtue signals, not only from the outside, but also from within one's own tribe. Societies must heal their tribal narratives from within. This begins with an awareness of what it is and why it exists in the first place.

For the sake of this essay, I will define a tribe as a group of people who are characterized by a common *tribal narrative*. A tribal narrative, in turn, is a (typically quite vast) collection of stories, ideas, thought patterns, beliefs, customs, values, and expectations that is shared by all members of the tribe. Tribes and their corresponding narratives can be large and stable over time -- think of religions with billions of members -- or small, fleeting, and rapidly changing, like a group of friends who get together on occasion. In the case of a small group, the narrative may be nothing more than a colleciton of implicit or explicit expectations about what we're doing and why (show up after work, no talking about the affair between Alice and Bob that we all know is happening) and perhaps flavored with a few inside jokes. In the case of a religion with billions of adherents and that has had hundreds or thousands of years to develop, the narrative is obviously much more vast than that. Tribes, and their corresponding narratives, can and do overlap: Christianity with Protestant vs Catholic; Ismal with Sunni and Shia; any given political party with multiple overlapping factions. These subtribes may or may not get along amicably. 

The first observation to make about any given tribal narrative is that all of its elements tend to hang together *loosely*, but it would seem, *never perfectly*. The tribal narrative can be envisioned as a tapestry, with each thread in the tapestry representing a different concept, custom, expectation, story, etc. Frequently, one thread will be entwined and supported by many others; a religious holiday, for example, that is rooted in one or more parables and stories, each of which threads in and of themselves. But it has been my observation that most -- perhaps all -- tribal narratives contain a small handful of narrative elements that an outsider would reject, all things being equal. In some cases, the thread in question is a belief in some event that an outsider would consider to be fantastical and yet unproven. Think of some story from some religion that adherents believe to be true, but others do not. In other cases, there are what outsiders would consider to be internal logical inconsistencies, logical fallacies, or sometimes downright hypocrisy. 

I will refer to these elements as *toxic threads*, and they will fit broadly into two categories: *unfalsifiable beliefs* and *logical inconsistencies*. In the tapestry analogy, imagine one or more threads in the tapestry that are tangled into knots, or with a color pattern that seems to clash in some fashion. Clash from whose perspective? Ah, that is the question. My definition of toxic does not require you to distinguish hypocrisy from consistency, or truth from fiction, in the absolute sense. A toxic thread, *by definition*, is almost universally accepted by tribal members while at the same time being rejected by non-members because of its toxic nature. The definition and identification of toxic threads does not depend on who is right and who is wrong, the insoder or the outsider. The definition is that insiders and outsiders evaluate the threads differently. It is important to get this definition right, because my goal, and your challenge, will be to identify the toxic threads within your own tribe. I therefore stress: it is not constitute an admission that your tribe's beliefs are wrong. Only that outsiders consider them wrong; which makes those threads the perfect substrate for *virtue signals*.

One of the hallmarks of tribalism is that we, all of us, as social creatures, tend to be quite sensitive to toxic threads of tribes to which we do not identify, while at the same time being blind to the toxicity of those elements within the tribe(s) to which we do identify. I call this trait [name?], and its growing intensity is one of the hallmarks of rising tribalism. Who among us has never had the thought: *How is it possible for THOSE PEOPLE to be so stupid, hypocritical, downright evil, to say and do and believe those things. Thank goodness WE are not at all like that!* Indeed, this *apparent lack of self-awareness* of the toxicity within one's own tribe is itself a toxic thread, perhaps the most basic toxic thread of them all. *THEY claim to care about the children, yet they do these things that kill the children. Hypocrites!*

## Why do toxic threads exist within the tribal narrative?

I'm only going to touch upon this briefly. Think back to the analogy to a tapestry, with patterns woven into it, patterns that are characteristic of the tribe. It is my contention that toxicity plays an important, perhaps a necessary, role in construction of the tribal tapestry, because without toxicity, there could be no virtue signals. 

## Virtue signals

I can remember when the phrase "virtue signal" seemed to appear more and more frequently in public discourse. Perhaps somewhere in the mid 20-teens? Although its definition was opaque to me (at first), there was no doubt that the term was quite pejorative. I remember wondering: what is a virtue signal? What's wrong with virtue, and what's wrong with signaling one's virtue to others? We all want to set a good example, right? Are there good virtue signals and bad ones?

The definition of a virtue signal that I will use in this essay is the one that makes the most sense to me, and I humbly submit it to the world. My definition of a virtue signal is that it requires a core set of threads that are non-toxic and a superimposed, intermingled set of tribe-specific toxic threads. These are intermingled in a way to make them difficult to untangle and presented in the form of a *challenge*. The challenge requires you either to accept or to reject the bundle. In essence, you are given a test in which you must weigh the "good" (nontoxic) and the "bad" (toxic) elements and decide which is more important that the other. If you side one way, it is an indication that you have adopted and internalized the tribal narrative, including the toxic elements; the other way indicates you have not. It is, in effect, a litmus test. Of course, there can be nuances and you can hedge your answer, but the basic idea is that of a binary outcome. A litmus test to discern whether you are WITH US or AGAINST US.

Why do these tests happen? The naive answer would be that Alice subjects Bob to a virtue signal so she will know whether he is with her or against her. And sometimes, that does happen. But my observation is that it is more common for Bob to subject himself to the test. Why? So that he can signal to his peer group that he is ONE OF THEM. Because he wants to be a part of society. Because he wants to belong. As do we all.

And what's wrong with wanting to belong? To be a part of something greater than ourselves? It is, indeed, one of our most basic spiritual needs. 

## How to pass the test

My observations are that there are two broad categories by which a virtuous member of a tribe internalizes the toxic elements of a virtue signal. 

The first broad category is what would be termed *rationalization*. The individual finds a reason to justify the toxic elements, making strategic use of one or more logical fallicies if necessary (which, generally speaking, they are due to the internal logical inconsistencies inhernet to the toxic elements). This process is not an easy one, cognitively speaking. It genuinely takes work. One must not only figure out which logical fallacies spport the virtue signal and the broader narrative; one must activley endorse these fallacies. This is often not easy to do with a straight face. In some cases, the virtuous individual may pretend to endorse the toxic elements; but frequently, perhaps usually, practice is to genuinely convince oneself that the fallacies are not fallacies, using whatever arguments one can grasp. (These arguments are often referred to derogatorily as [reasons], as in: you say X because of [reasons].) 

But rationalization of the toxic elements of the virtue signal is not the only mechanism for aceptance. It is probably not the preferred method. Whenever possible, the favored method is to *ignore* the toxicity. Easier it is to ignore a logical inconsistency, or never even to note it in the first place, than it is to constuct a (sometimes convoluted) argument in its defense. Despite the rlative ease, however, this also takes effort, cognitive work. The virtuous individual must learn what, specifically, to ignore. Where not to look. WHen you hear someone use the phrase "studiously ignore," this is what they are talking about.

## An example

I will present a real-life recent example of a virtue signal; first, to illustrate the components above; second, to illustrate that a proper understanding of this phenomenon is crucial in one's understanding of the world around us.

This particular example is of an event that was discussed on the All-In Podcast. On (data), (name of person) spoke in front of the Canadian Parliament. He was given a standing ovation; this, in the context of our current support of the war in Ukraine against Russia. In a surprising turn of events, it was later unconvered that this man, a (Ukranian?) soldier who fought against the Russians in the 1940s, was -- and this is the part that absolutely no one saw coming -- fighting on the side of Germany. A little investigation revealed that he had joined and fought as a soldier in the Waffen SS. He was, as we hear so often said, a "literal" Nazi. This turned into a scandel, for obvious reasons, resulting in the resignation of (leader of Parliament?), with other politicians including Trudeau distancing himself, professing his ignorance of tis man's prior allegiances.

What followed on the All-In Podcast was a discussion, appropriately in my mind, of virtue signaling. Their discussion centered around whether those in the Trudeau administration (or whoever arranged the speaker??) had made an honest mistake, thereby innocent of supporting Nazis (at least knowingly), or whether they knew of this man's history and were therefor guilty of knowingly supporting Nazis. In other words, are those who supported the speaker *good guys* (as they profess) or (secretly) actually *bad guys*. With us, or against us: that was the question. Friedberg and JCal each seemed to be of the persuasion that we should give them the benefit of the doubt: surely, at least presumably, they didn't know. Surely the mistake was egregious, but at least we could call it an honest mistake. David Sacks (appropriately, in my mind) observed that their mistake was difficult to make. Do a little math; who else might he have been fighting for? The question should have popped un in somebody's mind. But alas, that question, apparently, did not. If it did it was not pursued.

How would wwe analyze the scenario from the proposed perspective? I would say this: the core non-toxic belief is that the unprovoked invasion of another country is a bad thing. This is an idea that everyone in this discussion and scenario endorses; therefore, it fits the definitino of non-toxic. The toxic overlay in this case is that the speaker had been fighting for the Nazis at a time when the Nazis were quite guilty of multiple unprovoked invastions. Clearly, then, we have a double standard; and this is the toxic overlay. Those who accepted the challenge were the ones who gave the standing ovation. those who rejected the challenge were the ones who rolled their eyes. 

Following the discussion above, did those who accept the challenge guilty of rationalization? To the best of my knowledge, and as per the discussants in All-In, the anwer is no: as soon as his past came out, he was denocunded. No rationalization was given. But what we dis see was the second, almost universally favored, method of internalization: *studious ignorance*. As David Sacks pointed out in the discussion, all mention in the media about Nazi associations in Ukraine disappeared in the media after Russia's invasion. Why? Because the tribal narrative changed to a war footing. We supported Ukraine. Virtue signaling required studied ingnorance of facts that were inconsistent with the wartime narrative. 

If one is studiously ignorant of some fact, can the lack of knowledge of that fact truly be categorized as an honest mistake? The answer is a complicated one. Not quite yes, not quite no. But here's my point: this focus on the question, are they innocent or guilty, with us or against us, this question that was at the heart of uch of the All In Podcase, *is not the right question to be asking*. That question is, itself, driven by a tribal need to categorize individuals as good or bad. The right question, or set of questions, should be directed at an understanding of how and why this happens. What is the tribal narrative, what are the toxic elements, and are the tribal tapestry healthy or unhealthy? A focus on these questions would 

Again, the question is not: does my tribe have toxic elements? Because the answer is: yes. All sufficiently developed tribes do. All the time. In good times and in bad times. This realization is difficult to accept; we all want to believe that toxicity is an attribute that applies to THEM, never to US. But a refusal to accept this fact is akin to a refusal by shitcoiners to accept the primacy of PoW. The quesitno is not whether we need PoW; the answer is yes, stemming from the human condition, that we are a bunch of people with no reason to trust each other, do not magically all just get along. Proof of cognitive work is also unavoidable. The only question is whether it is executed in an optimal fashion or in a pathologic fashion.

Getting back to All-In: they have recently discussed the infiltration of the TED commhnity by wht Sacks calls (appropriately) the "woke mind virus." Woke virtue signals should be conceptualized as exactly that: virtue signals with a core of non-toxic threads (which is what adherents focus on), an overlay of toxic elements (which adherents sometimes rationalize but usually studiously ignore), and a challenge. Rather than focus on each virtue signaling test, we need to take a step back and observe the bigger picture, which is the pathology, that should surprise no one, that results from more and more toxic elements being incorporated into any tribal narrative. Armed with this sort of understanding, it might become feasible for someone like the leader of the TED organization to confront the vocal minority who, in the words of Sacks (or Chamath?), are causing the "rotting" of the TED organization. btw: The guy they interviewed was correct to observe the motivation behind the vocal minority, that they feel their position to be threatened. This jives with my musical chairs analogy.

## Proof of work

There is a reason people at times are extolled to "do the work." The above two processes, rationalization and studied ignorance, require effort. These processes can be cognitively demanding. And on top of that, the internalization of such fallacies can hinder one's understanding of objective reality. This is how tribal fiction, tribal blind spots are constructed. At some point, perhaps in a separate essay, I may go through examples of tribes throughout history in which this process has been to the detriment of the tribe. One example, in passing, is that many prominent scientists in the Nazi community were uncomfortable saying or supporting anything that might be interpreted by their peers as supporting Einstein's theory of relativity, including the equation E=mc2 which allows us to calulate the amnount of energy released in an atomic bomb. This reluctance to support "jewish science" may have (likely? need ref) hindered anhy progression the regime may have made on the atomic bomb.

In some instances, the amount of cognitive work that is expected by the community seems to undergo adjustment. We have been witnessing this over the past few years among the tribal left. When the requisite cognitive workload goes up, we observe new virtue signals flow through society with greater degree of toxicity. Who decides when these adjustments occur and by how much? Like the bitcoin adjustment algorithm, the answer is that no single individual or panel of individusla is in charge. It is, seemingly, an algorithm, run by everyone in the community, with at least some semblance of consensus that arises in the process.

My reference to bitcoin's proof of work is no accident. I conisder this essay to be an extension of the journey through the rabbit hole. Motivated and made possible by the realization and appreciation of the centrality of proof of work in understanding the human condition.

Comprehension and internalization (* internalization: weave threads into your own tapestry) of non-toxic elements does take some dgree of effort. But internalization of toxic threads is always harder. Virtually always exacts a greater cost to the individual. When someone tells you to *do the work*, you are literally being shamed into internalization of a toxic narrative.

## What is virtue?

For the sake of this essay, virtue is defined as loyalty to tbe tribe. And loyalty is demonstrated by incorporation of the tribal narrative; in particular, internalization of the tribal narrative fiction, those elements of the tribal tapestry that outsiders reject due to toxicity. No one scores points with the tribe for agreeing that water is wet. But if you endorse and internalize the toxic elements, it is evidence of loualty. The more toxic the threads, the greater the expense incurred for incorporating those threads into the fiber of your being, the greater the (apparent) virtue. Of course, no test is perfect. But 

## Common elements of toxicity within the tribal tapestry 

Two almost universal categories of threads:

First, the belief that WE are not toxic. OK maybe sometimes, but always for a good reason. But THEM, on the other hand; toxicity knows no bounds.

Second: some variation on the theme of altruism is frequently (always?) used as the basis for the tribal narrative fiction. 

## The problem

I conjecture that the trigger for toxic tribalism is a rise, for whatever reason, of *intra-tribal* competition. Too many people who think they deserve eleite status withihn the tribe, but not enough chairs to go around. Imagine a game of musical chairs. When times are good and the number of chairs is increasing, there is little need for virtue signaling. But when the chairs are being taken away (or the number of players is increasing), 

When virtue signaling spins out of control, takes on a life of its own, we see the creation of new virtue signals, each more toxic than the ones that came before it. In times of such stress, the tribal narrative itself changes over time. We see new beliefs, new virtue signals, with new elements of toxicity that would have beenj rejected yesterday, but are endorsed with great conviction today. Typically accompanied by a healthy (then again, perhaps unhealthy) dose of moral indignation. Gotta be convincing.

At any given time, it may be difficult to discern what proportion of tribal members are *true believers* and what percentage are simply doing what they perceive needs to be done to survive. At any given time, there are likely some true beleivers and some who are not. But consider Solzhenitsin: they are lying, we know they are lying, they know we know they are lying, etc. So it is conceivable that EVERYONE knows the toxic elemebnts of the tribal tapestry are false and/or internaly inconsistent, yet no one is willing to say so. Why? Because it's impossible to form society without tribes, and it's impossible to form tribes without tribal tapestries, and it's impossible to form tribal tapestries without unique patterns, and it's impossible to do that without toxic threads. Also, it's impossible to form society without virtue signals, and those require toxic threads as one of the essential ingredients. There simply is no virtue signaling without being faced with a difficult choice. And no difficult choices without toxic threads. 

The phenomenon of "triggering" can, in some contexts, be understood in terms of virtue signaling: when a member of the out-group is presented with a challenge and rejects the toxic elements. The individual who does the triggering is a member of the tribe and does this on purpose. The act of subjecting someone to a virtue signaling challenge, triggering the outsider, and reveling in the resulting moral indignation, is in fact a method of demonstrating one's own acceptance of the challenge (as evidenced by the pleasure one takes in observing the triggered individual). It is, in this sense, a method of subjecting oneself to the challenge and signaling one's own virtue to observers, the ultimate motivation being to ensure acceptance by the community. This is probably the motivation behind individuals in a mob who subject an individual to a struggle session (CCP cultural revolution).

## My challenge to you

In summary, a virtue signal has three primary components:
- a core benign, non-toxic set of beliefs (threads)
- a superimposed layer of toxicity
- a challenge

I challenge all readers of this essay to the following two-step process:

First, identify a virtue signal within a tribe to which you *do not identify*. Why? because this comes naturally to us. You can almost certainly already do it. What you have probably not done, though, is to conceptualize the virtue signal itself, breakiung it down into the three components above.

Second -- this is the hard part -- identify a virtue signal within a tribe to which you DO identify. This step may be difficult for some. We all have the tendency to believe that our own communities are not toxic. Our tribe is enlightened! Evil has been banished, and the truth is always on our side. And so, for this challenge, bear in mind that "toxic" does not mean genuinely wrong: it means that outsiders view it as wrong. Maybe the outsiders have a point; or maybe it's because outsiders are not enlightened enough to see the truth. Whatever floats your boat. 

Once you have identified one or more virtue signals that are active within your community, try to take a step back and observe them in action. Look specificaly for the challenge. Think to yourself that the underlying question has nothing to do with the threads themselves; the REAL question being asked is this: are you with us or against us? When you see someone pass the virtue signaling test, ask: what would happen if the individual were to reject the challenge? Answer is typically that the individual would be the target of microaggressions: moral disapproval. Ask yourself whether the threat of moral disapproval might or might not play a part in the individual's endorsement of the toxic elements of the challenge, and what that implies about whether the toxic elements are in fact true or false. Look for moral indignation among those who accept the challenge (endorse the toxic elements). Consider the damage that may occur as more and more toxic elements are incorporated into your tribe's system of beliefs. Consider whether your tribe might be in the process of running off the proverbial cliff. If any of these thoughts alarm you, then if you care what happens to those around you, and if you have the courage, then do what you can do to call a spade a spade. Be a voice that helps to stop the wave of virtue signals. Be aware that in doing so, you will gain the silent respect of many others in your tribe.

*insert meme with the Nazi saying: are we the bad guys?*

Other things to look for: 
- judging a message on its own merits (healthy) versus by the messenger (unhealthy tribalism)
- moral indignation when a core part of the narrative fiction is challenged
- taking pleasure in triggering members of the out-group (Trump does this quite a bit)

But as you do so, keep in mind that virtue signals exist for a valid reason, as described above. Society is a good thing. Belonging is a good thing. Just because a belief is toxic does not necessarily mean it is pathologic. You'll have to think about what's good for you as an individual vs what's good for your tribe. These are very frequently at odds with one another. As an individual, acceptance by the tribe is necessary for survival. In which case: endorse the toxicity. But the health of the tribe is harmed when its core narrative is burdened by beliefs that are simply false.  From that perspective, you will want to assist in removing as many toxic threads from the collective narrative as you can. 

## Summary

The notion that tribal narratives exist, and frequently contain toxic elements, is not new to this essay (even if the terminology I'm using is nonstandard). Conventional wisdom says as much. The part about this essay that you may never have heard elesewhere is that toxicity serves a purpose, and that purpose is a valid one, and that purpose cannot be served without toxicity. The incorporation of toxic threads is, in a sense, a variation on the idea of Proof of Work, a concept that is familiar to bitcoiners. To many nocoiners and shitcoiners, PoW is wasteful and should be replaced with something that is not wasteful. Those who have gone sufficiently down the rabbit hole know that PoW is fundamentally indispensible. I propose that the incorporation of toxic threads into the cortical tapestry as a sign of allegiance to a tribe is its own form of proof of (cognitive) work; and it is likewise, equally, indispensible. We should strive not to eliminate virtus signaling, toxic narratives, etc, but to follow the example of bitcoin and execute PoW in a fashion that is the least destructive as possible. Electricity consumption by bitcoin is a form of PoW that is "healthy" as compared to the petrodollar, constant warfare, which is a different type of PoW that serves the same purpose -- establishment of a system of money -- but in a much more destructive and therefore much more "pathologic" format. Likewise, proof of cognitive work as described in this article is indispensible if we want to create orderly society among individuals who have no reason to trust each other; but it can be done in a healthy vs an unhealthy fashion. We need to better understand the difference.

## Appendix: tips on how leader of an organization (like TED) can confront those promoting toxic virtue signaling

Brian Armstrong famously, and to his credit, made it a point that virtue signaling would not be allowed to encumber his company, Coinbase. But what he did was not easy; any company leader runs the risk of being cancelled. How might insight help other community leaders follow Brian's example?

Step one is understanding. Identify the virtue signals. In particular, the healthy core and the toxic overlay. In discussions, acknowledge the healthy core. But then call the virtue signalers to task for the introduction of the toxic overlay. Make it clear how the toxic overlay is a betrayal of the core elements. Most importantly: anticipate how they will respond. Anticipate an escalation, with much moral indignation. these will be accompanied by either rationalization or studious ignorance. Be prepared to call out this behaviour for exactly what it is. Use the terminology of this essay in public discourse to explain the big picture, the real big picture, not the fictional one advocated by the virtue signalers.

Use some of the terminology in this essay to describe what they are doing and why it is pathologic for the organization. For example: the leader of the TED organization could

