Introduction
=====
 
This is a highly speculative work. In my heart, I know the collection of ideas are brilliant, insightful, and true. In my mind, I take a more sober view. It is quite possible that some or all of these ideas are misguided and wrong; more optimistically, they represent glancing views into the truth, requiring revisions, deletions and additions to generate a passably accurate window into our world. At the least, there are a handful of ideas that I have not encountered elsewhere, and which if true would qualify in my mind as *important*; but if they are incorrect, it would still make me happy if this work were to inspire other, more accurate but equally original and important thought. So in the end, I will settle, of course, for this work to be *useful*.

Background for how this model came to be. Motivation to beuild the decentralized web, conception of the concept graph and grapevine leading to the tapestry model, application to the brain, observations of extreme tribalism during the Trump and covid years.

The purpose of this book is to provide a bird's eye view of the Threaded Tapestry Model for Knowledge Representation and Curation for Distributed, Decentralized Systems, a.k.a. the Tapestry Model or the Threaded Tapestry Model (TTM). Throughout this book I illustrate the various ideas using two examples of a DDS: the decentralized web, and the cerabral cortex. A wide range of disciplines and topics will be covered, including: computer science, neuroscience, psychology, philosophy, politics.

Many of the ideas presented in this book may be categorized as simple observations. Other ideas are better categorized as hypotheses designed to tie those observations into patterns. In some cases, it may be difficult to distinguish the boundary between observation and hypothesis. But I will try my best to point out where I think I cross from the one to the other. Many of the observations and models will be familiar to most readers; and yet at least a handful of models, I expect, will be ideas that you have never before encountered. I have followed the (need a name for this) method to present each hypothesis, according to which each hypothesis should have one sentence summary, a one paragraph summary, one page, one chapter. There is a table of hypotheses at the end of this book. I should make it clear that I do not consider any of these hypotheses to be *proven*. Indeed, in many cases, I'm not sure how to prove them. Nevertheless, I have taken great pains to formulate each hypothesis in a fashion so that they are *falsifiable*, at least in principle. I will touch upon this topic at several points in this book.

My own educational background gives me two hats: scientist hat and an engineering hat. The genesis of the TTM stems from my attempts, while wearing my engineering hat, to build tools for the decentralized web. It was only later that the scientist in me began to consider the possibility that the brain and the dWeb face the same (similar) set of challenges and may, therefore, require the same (or similar) set of solutions. The driving and overarching idea of this book, therefore, is that the techniques that I have found useful in the construction of the decentralized web provides fertile ground to generate postulates regarding how the brain works. In other words, my inner engineer, trying to build the dWeb, may prove to be a useful tool to my inner scientist, trying to understand how the brain already works. Note that I have not and did not set out to discover consciousness. The TTM (in particular, its corollary: the cortical tapestry model, and its corollary: the tribal tapestry) suggest an explanation why any attempts to answer such a lofty question directly will be met with difficulty. And yet, in the final chapter I propose what the TTM may have to say on the topic of consciousness. 

Although I may seem to be saying the opposite at times throughout this book, one of the most important messages is that tribalism is a necessary component of human society. We need it. We cannot and should not try to eliminate tribes or tribalism. Here's what we need to do: we need to learn to recognize the difference between healthy tribalism versus pathologic tribalism. To do this, we need a better understanding of how the brain works, how knowledge is represented and curated, how tribalism is encoded. I contend that even under healthy conditions, proof of cognitive work and toxic threads are both necessary features. We are inclined to decry PoW as wasteful and toxic threads as, well, *toxic*; in each case, they are *bad* things that should be eliminated. But: no, they should not. Appeals to eliminate these things are, indeed, toxic themselves. We need to learn to create tribes in a way that maximizes the benefits while minimizing the costs. First and foremost, I propose we learn to recognize virtue signaling, not only when it is present in other tribes (which we can all already do), but when it is present in our own tribe. We must recognize virtue signaling from within, not just from without. (Entire chapter dedicated to this?)
