Summary of the Tapestry Model
=====

# Introduction

This article is a brief overview of the `Threaded Tapestry Model for Knowledge Representation and Curation for Distributed, Decentralized Systems`, also referred to as the `Threaded Tapestry Model`, or simply the `Tapestry Model` (TM). I have been developing this model since about 2015 or 2016, continuing through to the present day. The primary motivation was, and continues to be, to conceive an overall strategy and to begin to build a requisite set of open source tools for the creation of the decentralized web (dWeb). Over time, the neurologist in me began to speculate that the basic tools and methods that I am attempting to build for the dWeb may in fact already be at work in the brain. The rationale for this is that the dWeb (which we have not yet fully figured out how to build, in my opinion) and the brain (which of course does already exist in nature) share the common feature of being `distributed, decentralized systems`. As such, they face a similar set of problems which may require a similar set of solutions. And it is the purpose of the Tapestry Model to provide those solutions.

In this paper I will present what exactly I mean by a `distributed, decentralized system` (DDS). I will describe the particular challenges faced by a DDS with respect to knowledge representation and curation and will propose the Tapestry Model as a solution to this problem. In the context of the dWeb, the TM encompasses two techniques: one for knowledge representation and one for knowledge curation. I refer to the tools for knowledge representation as the `concept graph model`, according to which knowledge is encoded as a `graph database` and is organized according to a small handful of constraints. The most fundamental constraint is the `class thread`, used to define and organize the `concept`. Additional constraints are used to build basic relationships between concepts. I refer to the tools for knowledge curation as the `grapevine model`, designed to enable Alice to entrust curation of knowledge in a context-specific manner to her extended web of trust. Roughly speaking, the concept graph allows the enumeration of alternatives, and the grapevine allows us to choose among those alternatives.

The notion that information may be represented and curated in the brain in a manner similar to that of the Tapestry Model will be referred to as the Cortical Tapestry Model (CTM). Armed with the concept graph model of knowledge representation, it becomes simple and natural to speculate not only about how information is processed in the brain, but to consider how much computational power is required for such processing, and the role that computational efficiency may play in brain function. For instance, we can begin to speculate in some detail not only how knowledge of the outside world may be stored within the graph, but also how social constructs, such as the definitions of words and concepts, may be encoded within the tapestry. We can begin to speculate at an information-theoretic level what it means for conflicting information or logical inconsistencies, called `toxic threads`, to exist within a tapestry, and to speculate simple heuristics that the brain could use to identify and resolve such conflicts.

Perhaps surprisingly, the Cortical Tapestry Model lends itself quite naturally to what I call the Tribal Tapestry Model. According to this model, any self-organizing group of individuals in a society, referred to as a `tribe`, is associated with, or even defined by, a `tribal narrative` (sometimes referred to as the `tribal tapestry`), shared by all members of the tribe, which is a collection of concepts, beliefs, stories and expectations, loosely knit together, encoded into the tapestry of each individual of the tribe according to the tenets of the tapestry model. This leads to the most highly speculative hypothesis of this work, which is the notion that `toxic threads` are an essential component of most if not all tribal tapestries. If true, this hypothesis will explain why it would seem that we are all, each and every one of us, `batshit crazy`. 

The shift between the TM and the CTM will require a shift in thinking from that of an engineer, trying to build something to solve a problemn, to that of a scientist, trying to uncover that which already exists in nature. The notion that the efforts of an engineer may inform the speculations of the scientist may seem to be a conceit of sorts. I am not aware of any historical precedent in the history of science. Ane yet, here I am. I will stress, therefore, that the hypotheses presented in this are all highly speculative. If they turn out to be wrong, I hope that at the very least, they will at least be interesting, and may provoke more ideas in a fruitful manner. 

# Distributed, Decentralized Systems

For the purposes of this paper, a distributed, decentralized system will be defined as a set of `entities`, separated in space (distributed) but which nevertheless have the ability to alert themseleves to one another's presence and to communicate with each other directly, and which have the ability to organize spontaneously into subsets, or networks, such that any given network will require (or will be defined by) a common language used by members of the network to communicate. It is assumed that networks change dynamically and may overlap. They may be fleeting or may be long lasting. Members of any given network may be admitted or excluded dynamically. The language used by any given network may also change dynamically and will be determined by mutual consensus.

The central challenge of any DDS is the mechanism by which mutual consensus is attained regarding the common modes of communication (language) of any given network. The simplest and most direct method would be for each network to revolve around a single entity with the authority to design the language, or at least to adjudicate any disagreements over linguistic preferences. The word `decentralized` in DDS indicates that this method is rejected. In other words, it is required that there is no special or privileged position of authority within any network.

In the case of the decentralized web, the entities in question may be considered to be users, or individual human beings (or perhaps even non-human entities, as in the internet of things). A network would be any subset of users using a common mode of communication. The most typical examples of networks would be platforms, such as Twitter, Facebook, eBay, etc. Consider Twitter. When a user composes a tweet which is broadcast to others, the tweet is stored an organized and formatted in a manner dictated by the company. Each tweet, for example, is limited to a certain nnumber of characters. Who decides the character limit? The company, of course. In this manner, the modes of communication are centralized. Other examples of networks such as nostr are more decentralized, in the sense that they are open source rather than proprietary, and anyone can conribute to the open source code base. And yet nostr is not fully decentralized in the spirit of this paper. Even nostr is centralized around a repository.

As an example of a fully decentralized language, look no further than the spoken word. For any given language, who decides the particular combination of sounds or letters used to represent common objects like a spoon, a fork, a pencil or a pen? Is there a particular university with the authority to make changes? Perhaps a company like Webster's dictionary? The answer is: there is no central authority, neither official nor unofficial. The fact that over a billion English speakers somehow agree to call a pencil a pencil is rather remarkable. It is a phenomenon I call "loose consensus." If you want to call it something else, you are free to do so; no centralized entity enforces consensus. And yet, consensus seems to happen. Only in special or unusual cases does consensus break down.

In the case of the brain, the entities in question are different regions of the brain. The exact nature of each entity I consider an open question, but I will put forth two possibilities. The first and simplest possibility is that each entity is an individual neuron. However, I prefer to think in terms of the second possibility, that each entity is a group of neurons, namely: a cortical column. We know from a variety of imaging modalities, such as functional connectivity, that the brain is characterized by a variety of different types of networks: default mode network, the frontoparietal network, the visual and somatomotor networks, the dorsal and ventral attention networks, the limbic network, etc. Each network spans a subsets of the entire brain which, we presume, communicate with one another in some fashion. Each of these networks may be divided into subnetworks -- some already described in the literature, others that are yet to be described. My presumption is that the entities within each network (or subnetwork) must make use of a network-specific language. I conjecture that the elements of these languages, analogous to the words of a spoken language, are not hardwired into our DNA and are not fixed for all time, but which are dynamic. I further conjecture that for any given network, there is no single entity -- no individual cortical column, for example -- that lords over all the others the way that a social media tech company lords over its users. I conjecture that instead, the common language used by any given network is decided by loose consensus, similar to the way we all agree to call a spoon an spoon: no single entity is in change. 

How *exactly* loose consensus happens in an DDS (whether the dWeb or the brain) is precisely the topic of the Tapestry Model. Of course, I do not know that loose consensus is a feature of the brain. For all I know, the default mode network might elect a King Cortical Column, like the CEO of a tech company. But somehow that just seems unlikely.

So in summary: the central challenge of any distributed, decentralized system is: how can any given network establish loose consensus so that members of the network can communicate? That is the topic of the next sections on the concept graph and the grapevine models.

# The Concept Graph

The beginning assumption of the concept graph model is that information is encoded in a graph database. For those familiar with graph databases, I refer to the open source project, `neo4j`, as an example of a graph database. For the sake of this article, I define a graph database as a collection of nodes and edges. Each edge is a line that connects exactly two nodes. There are three ways, each with its own format and encoding, to store information in the graph:
- in nodes
- in edges
- in the topology of the graph

The question is: how *exactly* is information encoded in nodes, in edges, and in the topology? We make the following assumptions:
- Nodes store a variable amount of information, with no specific upper bound on how much information is stored in any given node. In a graph database such as neo4j, a common practice would be for each node to represent a file, with different nodes pointing to different file types (images, data files, etc) of varying size. In the brain, if we assume that each node is a cortical column, I would point out that the size and structure of cortical columns is highly variable. 
- Edges store a relatively small, relatively fixed amount of information. For example, in neo4j, each edge can be directed or not and will be assigned an edge type, such as "is owned by" or "is married to." In principle, the edge type could be a pointer to a data file, but in practice this is not done. In the brain, if we imagine an edge to correspond to an axonal projection from one neuron or one cortical column to another, we might imagine that different firing patterns or physical attributes of the projections could store some limited amount of information, akin to the name of the edge type in a computer graph database.
- The method that data is encoded into the topology of the graph is distinct from the method that it is encoded within nodes and edges.
